---
title: "Forum - January 2020"
topic: "Documentation Strategies and Tooling"
date: 2020-01-29
author: Ryan Bottriell
summary: "So what is documentation, exactly? On the surface it feels like a simple concept, but we very quickly realized as we jumped into our discussion that there are many different ways to define and categorize documentation - each of which comes with their own set of special circumstances."
---

Before jumping into things, it came up in this meeting that not everyone was aware of the slack channel that exists for this group. So I'll leave it here for anyone interested in joining:

[https://pipe-dev.slack.com](https://join.slack.com/t/pipe-dev/shared_invite/enQtOTQzNDE3MTkzNzMzLTA4ODRmMzFkMmUwODJkYzVkY2NmODhmZjAxZTI3MmI1NzVlNTYwNGI5MTYxYjgyNTFhZGVhMDgxOTNmOWEzN2M)

_Reach out to me in an email if this invite link doesn't work for you!_

# Documentation Strategies and Tooling

So what is documentation, exactly? On the surface it feels like a simple concept, but we very quickly realized as we jumped into our discussion that there are many different ways to define and categorize documentation - each of which comes with their own set of special circumstances.

## Flavours of Documentation

In general, we identified a few broad categories of documentation. I've taken the liberty of pulling together a few ideas from the discussion into what I hope is a useful set of categories:

- **Reference Documentation**: lives within the code, in the form of docstrings or comments
- **API Documentation**: how-to's, getting started, and even advanced documentation that makes the API accessible to developers, and provides much more guided knowledge that reference documentation may otherwise not
- **User Documentation**: written for the end-user to support them in using the application itself (if there is one)
- **Maintainer Documentation**: information about the design and structure of the code itself, for those who may later take on responsibility for the ongoing maintenance or seek to understand the purpose for it being as it is.
- **Community Documentation**: written by the users or larger community, often seen in a self-service, wiki-style system which expands on or fills gaps in the other documentation.

That first category, the reference documentation. There are a number of tools that exist for this; [Doxygen](http://www.doxygen.nl/) and [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/) are probably some of the common solutions (though not necessarily recommended ones). The more interesting question we had was: what's the purpose of this type of documentation? Most of us agreed that in a proper development environment, reading source code or jumping around in the editor was more likely how we would read the kind of information found in these docs.

Reference documentation is often the first to be created, but for internal libraries and code bases - it's arguably the least useful. The source code is readily available to all and doesn't help new developers get introduced to the code base.

Following the train of though it seems like API documentation is much more powerful. Being something still very close to the code base, but with the time and energy being put in to focus on showing examples and explaining concepts to help the reader learn.

One of the clear downsides to such documentation, however, is that because it lives at a distance to the code it can very easily become out-of-date. If there's one thing that we have all seen in our days it's documentation that's either old or just plain wrong.

One of the useful ways to handle this is through some form of testable documentation. The idea being that any code snippets or examples that you include in your documentation are somehow tested automatically alongside the code base. This way you can at the very least ensure that the examples being provided will work for those who try to leverage them. [Jupyter Notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) are one possible solution to this, at least for python APIs.

## Useful Documentation

At the end of the day, all we really want is to have documentation that is helpful and useful to the people that need it - but how do we get people to read our documentation?

Perhaps the better question is: why _don't_ people read our documentation? It seems to us that there are 2 possible reasons: the documentation is not helpful to them; or they simply could not find it.

This may not be a particularly insightful affirmation, but it does speak to the frailty of documentation. It really needs to be exactly what people need in the exact place that they need it. We also spoke about reading levels here, which ties into the different documentation types mentioned above. Really understanding who a piece of documentation of for, and writing it to be as accessible as possible to exactly that audience is an important and very difficult thing to get right.

One recommendation that we talked through was having new hires read through documentation and examples, adding or fixing any problems that they encounter. This only really works for the type of introduction documentation that a new hire would read - but circles back to the idea of regular maintenance and upkeep of documentation that exists.

## Spinning a Web

If your environment is anything like ours', there are undoubtedly a few if not many sources of information about your software. Whether it's the code itself; a ticketing system where users file bugs; internal technical discussions on tickets or in email; documentation pages for users, developers etc; readme pages in the repository; project reports and proposal documents in Google drive; and the list goes on...

Keeping all of this stuff up to date and having it available to anyone who might need it is probably a problem without a solution. We did however, pull out some useful ideas and recommendations that can help:

- automated alerts and emails should always include a link directly to troubleshooting and/or rollback documentation because that is exactly where and when it's needed
- don't just reference ticket numbers in the code, include a brief _why_ comment so that the developer doesn't need to read the whole ticket discussion and in case the ticket number or link goes dead in the future
- don't over-explain simple concepts - a few clear sentences is better than a wall of text, and we can't expect people to become experts on day one
- let your readers contribute back easily since they are the best people to help add clarity or remove complexity
- have a good search solution, because in this era people know how to search the web for answers; we should allow people to exercise that skill internally as well
- include documentation in the release process; ensure that developers think about it as they prepare their merge requests

## Automation and Tooling

Having an easy way for documentation to get created, updated and released is definitely important. We also agree, however, that you simply cannot create good and useful documentation without a human touch. The same goes for release notes or any other form of communication that might be automated or go out regularly.

There was also a discussion about timing here. The default setup for automated systems is to notify people as soon as a change goes out and is available, but there is something to be said about delivering such information only after they are _running_ the new version of the software. "You are using these new features now" is arguably much more relevant than "These new features are available when you or your production decides to update".

That being said there are definitely still people who want and even need to know about new releases. Maybe they are the ones deciding to update, or they are the developer waiting for a bug fix. In reality, the solution is probably to have a few different delivery pipelines for the information - and leverage the process that makes the most sense for each user or class of user (aka: devs get release notes immediately and users get release noted the first time they run it).

We also talked about the parallels between news and docs. There are so many seemingly smart systems that try to find and deliver people relevant news from the internet, and our problems about documentation are not entirely dissimilar. Maybe we can learn lessons from the changing news industry about how people read and consume information these days... Really what we should all do is just start a podcast for each of our libraries, or just stream the whole development process on Twitch!

Thanks for reading!

## Further Reading and Links

- [Hemingway Editor](http://www.hemingwayapp.com/): an online application that grades the readability and reading level of some text.
- [Hugo](https://gohugo.io) is a pretty great static site generator that uses markdown (and is used for pipedev.org!)
- [gitlense extension for vscode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=eamodio.gitlens): annotates commit messages and provides really powerful git tools
- [Annotations in PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/pycharm/investigate-changes.html#annotate) shows a useful heatmap of change over time as well as providing inline commit messages
- [Git Kraken](https://www.gitkraken.com/) is a really pretty and very useful git GUI client
- [ASCII Flow](http://asciiflow.com/) is an awesome tool to generate diagrams and graphs in ascii art for use in code or text-only documentation
- [Matrix](https://matrix.org/), [Mattermost](https://mattermost.com), and [Rocket Chat](https://rocket.chat) all came up in our brief sidebar discussion on chat systems
