---
title: "Dreams for 2023"
date: 2023-02-25
author: Ryan Bottriell
summary: "What are we excited about in the year to come?"
---

We're a little way into the year already, so I thought it would be nice to look ahead and think about where we would like to see things go over the coming months. This was also the first in-person meetup that we've had since the pandemic, and also the first ever hybrid event ever.

## Dreams for 2023

### ChatGPT

It seems fitting that the first topic is around AI, and we all agreed that there's an awful lot of hype in the news right now. 
For developers, there are a few use cases that we've seen which could prove to be legitimately useful. The first is in writing unit tests. There's a reasonable amount of boilerplate and common patterns that go into these tests and being able to generate pieces could make the process much faster and more effective.
Secondly is optimization. One could certainly argue that some if not a lot of optimization problems are still human-only, but for functions or sections of code sometimes the results from asking an AI to optimize it are at the very least interesting, if not useful.

### A.I. and Machine Learning Overall

We also recognized that there has been a lot of discussion around AI art with models like StableDiffusion.
There's obviously the question of how this art might change the industry. We didn't have too many predictions but there wasn't a sentiment that this would replace any jobs in the coming months. If anything, these will become tools in the pipeline that we will need to have available for artists.

The interesting thing about machine learning and AI in the pipeline is that training these models requires large datasets and a high amount of compute. Although this sounds like rendering, the differences are just enough that typical render farm setups are not well-positioned to churn through them. This year might prove challenging for us in pipeline if we find ourselves needing to support these alternative workflows in systems that were not quite designed to handle them.
Beyond creative uses, we wanted to also think a little about how we might like to leverage AI within classical pipeline tools and workflows.

For a number of years already there have been products that use intelligence to identify and tag asset and media libraries. Perhaps as these models become more accessible, we will be able to integrate them more easily (read cheaply) into existing tools in our pipelines.

### Rust

We seem to talk about the Rust language at least a little bit in each meetup. We would love to see more adoption in the industry this year. The BoF at Siggraph this year was a lot of fun and the ASWF Rust working group continues to be watched by many.

There definitely seems to be more adoption happening in the server and API space, so even a small push into more VFX-y code would be awesome to see. Maybe bindings to a common library or application…

### Python 3

Yes, we are still talking about this transition. This is the year that many DCCs stop releasing builds that run python 2 and so there's a pretty good chance that we will put the migration behind us. (yay!)

The real excitement here is in being able to write python 3 code rather than code that's compatible with python 2 and python 3. Hopefully, soon we will really be able to take advantage of the new language features (type hints, anyone?).

### Gaffer & BPM

Gaffer has made many great releases recently, and there are great use cases for it as a general processing tool for putting together pipeline workflows. It's something that many of us are interested in exploring or exploring further this year.
More broadly, there are existing tools around business process modeling (BPM)  for expressing workflows in a node graph, and even engines that can execute them. It's easy to get excited about the possibility of a visualized pipeline and maybe this is the year that some of us will make it a reality.

### Reviews

2022 saw the introduction of the ASWF open review initiative. There are big names behind this group, and we are all very excited to see some things materialize. A review tool that we can use is probably unrealistic, so the dream for 2023 is probably a clear roadmap or plan of what we can expect from this group.

### New Tools

Finally, we brefly talked about some dreams for seeing more of Blender in our pipelines, as well as the possibility of using AR/VR for layout workflows before running out of time.

### Conclusion

There are enough ideas on our collective lists to take more than a year to act on, and I think the hardest part for most of us will be picking the most valuable ones and finding the time to act on them (as usual). As usual, it will be interesting to hear what everyone gets up to over the coming months.

Thanks for reading!

### Links and Resources

These are all links that were shared in the chat or came up in conversation. We are not making any recommendations or endorsements here, but they may prove interesting as further reading or exploration.

- [https://www.prometheanai.com/](https://www.prometheanai.com/)
- [Agile machine learning with Zorroa's ML integration platform](https://medium.com/r/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOiHvVYD4Umc)
- [SpiffWorkflow (BPM Execution)](https://medium.com/r/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.spiffworkflow.org%2F)
- [Conductor (Workflow Orchestration)](https://medium.com/r/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fconductor.netflix.com%2F)
- [NVIDIA GTC 2021 - Multi User Collaboration in NVIDIA Omniverse](https://medium.com/r/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-ruwHg3tu9o)
