---
title: "Notes from Global CG Pipelines BoF"
date: 2024-07-30
author: Ryan Bottriell
summary: "Raw notes from the various topic discussion groups at the Birds of a Feather session at Siggraph North America."
---

Below are the notes collected from the Siggraph 2024 Birds of a Feather event on pipelines. The BoF space was organized into topic groups where attendees could move between topics and discuss as they wished. As one of the organizers, I asked folks in each group to try and keep notes as much as possible. Below is the result of that process.

These notes ask as many questions as they answer, follow different styles and are often terse. However, they also provide interesting insight into the topics provided and what was being discussed by each group.

# Notes by Topic

## To Web or Not To Web

- Generally, desktop application development is the norm in VFX studios, and Web development currently the exception.

- There are many reasons for this. Desktop app development has a lower barrier to entry technically, as you can write a UI in PyQt readily and it "just runs". Also, many applications and tools need to run in the context of a DCC application such as Maya, Houdini or Nuke, and in these cases writing a Python Qt app is the natural way to go.

- In contrast, there is a much higher barrier to entry in the Web space, as you need to set up a Web server for your application; create a Web application in a framework like React, Vue or Angular; usually also create one or more additional Web services to run data services using REST or GraphQL; provision these Web servers; deal with containerisation; deal with authentication; learn JavaScript, CSS and the whole Web tooling pipeline. Long story short, there are a lot of technical hurdles. There may also be associated political hurdles since different organisations may have greater or lesser appetite for empowering developers and TDs to create such services. Finally there might be the practical hurdle in that TDs are generally more likely to be familiar with Python than JavaScript.

- On the flip side, everyone in this group had a strong desire to move in the direction of Web development for many of the UIs currently served by desktop apps. There was a consensus that desktop applications tend to look very old-style and outdated compared to modern Web app design, and more geared to desktops only, whereas Web apps work well on a wide range of devices from desktops to laptops to tablets to mobile phones. Web apps have nicer progressive disclosure, more flexible layouts and are able to fade in/out content more readily (whereas traditional desktop apps tend to have more rigid visual layouts).

- Also, another big driver is that Web apps are inherently cross-platform, whereas desktop apps are by definition locked to a single operating system. (It is true that Qt is in-principle cross-platform but you would also need to invest in toolchain development if you wanted to practically target, say, Windows, if you had only ever previously targeted Linux). So Web development is just a great fit in cross-platform contexts, which is common in VFX (where artists might be on Linux, but coordinators or producers on Windows or MacOS).

- An additional big driver for Web apps is the developer experience and tooling, which has kept up-to-date in the Web space relative to the desktop space. All kinds of hot reloading are available in terms of both application logic and application UI, making for a more satisfying development experience.

- Some of the panelists reported that there was active resistance to Web services in the past, but other panelists reported that their organizations were more receptive. Generally there was a requirement in these studios that TDs would agree to ensure their skills in JavaScript were up-to-date, that they would make the effort to learn about containerization, and that they would commit to good development practices such as code reviews, but that provided these were followed, these studios were quite proactive in helping to set up and provision Web services. This was great feedback and was certainly well-received by those other panelists working in environments less welcoming of TDs developing Web services.

- One practical note that was made was that desktop applications do have one advantage in that they have access to the full repertoire of shell environment variables (such as user name, department and so on), allowing for customization of experience, whereas Web apps may have less context. (Or may have only limited context, even if the user name might be available via authentication).

- There was some discussion of hybrid approaches, such as using QWebEngine to embed Web applications within Qt desktop applications, as well as using WebAssembly to create Qt applications that can run in Web browsers. There was also a discussion about frameworks like Electron and React Native, that allow desktop applications to be developed using Web-style technologies.

- There was strong interest in developing a suite of open-source resources that could help lower the barrier to entry for TDs wanting to develop both desktop applications and Web applications. Examples might include a range of QWidgets (for desktop apps) and a range of so-called 'headless' JavaScript classes for Web apps (so-called because they are written in such a way as to be agnostic regarding the specific Web framework like React or Vue).

As a final note, this session was so well-received that we have started a new Discord server "Computer Graphics Product Group" to keep the conversations going.

## Open-Source Pipelines

Why don't we converge on open-source solutions?

- Generalizing pipelines is hard, existing open-source solutions still need to allow imposing strong opinions without forking the codebase.
- Do all studios think we are special? It's probably not the pipeline code that is special and maybe it's not as special as we think...
- the pipeline spaghetti, sometimes depending on proprietary tech (not often)
- open-source requires separating process from policy
- an open-source pipeline "kernel" is much different than the whole thing, and possibly much easier to generalize

Open-source projects allow smaller studios to contribute partial resources

pipeline always has to be a cross-team negotiation

Internal open source

- at the very least we should be taking this approach, allowing contributions from any internal dev

An open, standard "core" would be the idea but how do we get there?

- The landscape is better than before but no one as "it"
- Pipelines are intentionally different sometimes
- Maybe it's more like a menu than a full solution
- Also, how fast do you want to move?

A pipeline framework instead of something functional

What is super universal in all pipelines?

- versioning, dependency management
- validation
- relationships
- save/load or import/export
- production tracking abstractions

The pipeline itself is often the friction in adopting something shared

- Learning a new API is hard

Separating data flow from workflow

## USD: The Good, The Bad, The Ugly

The main issue with USD is artist adoption

It's easier to "Black Box" USD composition archs, rather than explore the complex parts

What is the balance to train staff on USD rather than black box?

- Depends on the technicality of the user
- Lighting and shading needs to know how it works

Using an Alembic immutable model helps on the Maya side

Do we have any asset management system woes?

- Laika wrote a new asset management system specifically for USD
- This system hides the complexities from the user interface
- Trying to minimize to many versions of the USD file when the layers change

How do you deal with lighting in Katana with USD?

- Latest Katana should support USD
- Solaris is USD native as well
- You always end up making custom tools for USD and your DCC of choice anyway

Sending and Receiving Assets

- Tight partnership studios will set up a transfer pipeline
- PAW Patrol had to design their HDAs specifically to be shared as USD scenes

Asset Resolvers

- Some don't have multi-site storage so there's less need

Converting VRay shaders to USD?

- Will MaterialX be the standard for USD shaders?

USD Kinds

- Used for search but not much more

How do you structure the layer stack?

- It's not great...
- Must publish to send to the render farm

## Unreal and Real-Time Tech in Pipelines

How to get wide types of data into and out of Unreal?

- Especially for post-production VFX
- Do the work in Unreal itself or send data in from the outside
- Send data from Unreal to Nuke? AOVs?
- For VFX, the pipelines has to be what works for you. Everyone needs side car files.

Compositing workflows - send to Nuke or do in Realtime

- Final pixel for animation being used
- Virtual production being used

Integration of Unreal into the pipeline is "cool" but it's hard and complex

New color and lighting thing coming out

Some places use Unreal for final render backgrounds - only used when render times are reasonable on beefy hardware (unreal as a renderer)

Medical Animation | medication action videos

- Currently traditional VFX pipeline rendered into Unreal
- Curious about doing it all in Unreal

Concepting in Unreal / Scouting

- how to send it out?
- world partition system to break it down
- extract section
- import each section, group by title
- extracting everything out en-mass can have memory issues? Can  USD help?
- but how do we extract position, animation, instancing, etc?

Gaussian splatting in Unreal

## What Does AI/ML Mean for Pipelines?

Asset management

- automated tagging
- more intelligent search
- integrating data from different systems (camera metadata, ...)
- bidding?

Issues:

- how to integrate ML to pipeline?
- technical aspects > results

Pipeline profiling - watching for bottlenecks?

Optimizing render settings?

Treating ML department like other departments (eg compositing, modeling)

Datasets per show

## Preparing for and Maintaining a Career in Pipeline

What is pipeline?

- nobody knows...
- depends on the size of the company
- "glue between different departments" in general - bigger companies have more specialized roles (eg artist-facing TDs, data I/O, system admin)

Expert vs. Generalist: Which is Better?

- one of the most important things is to interact, have the desire to learn new skills and apply the knowledge you have
- know how to talk to artists, know how to solve problems
- general knowledge is important, but it doesn't have to be crazy deep

Grad School / What Programs to Look For / Is It Worth it?

- everyone has different paths, a lot of it depends on how you want to learn. If you like academia, master's degree can be a good choice
- higher education makes it easier to get visas
- Master's equals more specialized and more engineering focused, so may be farther from artists (think R&D)
- for many pipeline positions, a bachelor's is more than enough so a master's is something you would do because you care about it personally
- personal projects are great, and there are a lot of online resources too. A master's degree is not the only path

Experience for Entry-Level Jobs

- When a job says "3 years of experience" it's more of a guideline - don't stress about it
- Don't sell yourself short vis-a-vis transferable experience/projects, and it's okay/encouraged to include retail jobs as a part of your experience

General Career Path

- It's not unusual to jump between positions that are more art-heavy and then more tech-heavy
- Don't worry too much about getting stuck in one job, as long as you like solving problems you will probably have a varied career if that's what you want
